多图预警
!!!

5岁男孩15页简历走红网络，引发中国教育大讨论
A 5-Year-Old's 15-Page RésuméCaptivates China

纽约时报
New York Times
BEIJING — The young applicant is described as confident and courageous. His résumé, at 15 pages, is glittering, complete with performance reviews (“full of energy”), a map of his travels (trips to Tokyo and Bali) and a list of books he has read this year (408 in total).
北京——这位年轻申请人有自信、勇敢的性格。他长达15页的简历熠熠生辉，有好的表现评语（比如“敢拼”）、旅行去过的地方（东京和巴厘岛），以及今年已经读过的书（408本）。
简历

“简历，履历”常用的有两种说法：
1）résumé实际上是个法语单词，英文解释为“Your résumé is a brief account of your personal details, your education, and the jobs you have had. You are often asked to send a résumé when you are applying for a job.”
2）curriculum vitae，CV，拉丁语，英文解释：a short written document that lists your education and previous jobs, which you send to employers when you are looking for a job.
captivate

表示“使着迷，迷住，吸引”，英文解释为“to attract someone very much, and hold their attention”，举个：
I was captivated by your brilliant mind.
我为你的聪慧所着迷。
glittering

多个含义：
1）表示“闪光的，闪耀的”，英文解释为“giving off many small flashes of light”，如：glittering jewels 璀璨的珠宝
2）表示“辉煌的，非常成功的，光彩夺目的”，英文解释为“very impressive or successful”，如：a glittering career 辉煌的事业
3）表示“盛大的，华丽的；众星云集的”，英文解释为“connected with rich, famous and fashionable people”，如：a glittering array of celebrities 名人云集
But the applicant is not a seasoned job seeker. He is a 5-year-old boy from southern China applying for a spot in first grade at a Shanghai private school.
不过，这个申请人并不是一名经验丰富的求职者，而是中国南方的一名五岁男孩，这是他想成为上海一所私立学校一年级新生的入学申请。

seasoned

表示“经验丰富的”，英文解释为“used to describe someone who has a lot of experience of a particular thing”，举个：
Tom was by then a seasoned musician with six albums to his credit.
到那时汤姆已经发行了六张专辑，是个经验丰富的音乐家了。
还可以表示食物“已调味的，调过味的”，英文解释为seasoned food has salt, pepper etc added to it，如：
a highly seasoned piece of fish 味道很浓的一块鱼
以及表示木材“风干的，晾干的”，英文解释为seasoned wood has been prepared for use by drying.
“I hope I can outperform my parents,” the boy is quoted as saying, between photos showing him playing the piano, swimming and driving a toy car.
“我要青出于蓝胜于蓝，”男孩在简历中说，还附上了他弹钢琴、游泳、开玩具车的照片。
The résumé, which was leaked and shared widely online this week, has provoked a mix of fascination, indignation and debate about whether children in China's test-crazed education system are being raised as soulless strivers.
这份本周在网上泄露出来，并被广泛流传的简历引发了各种反响，有人好奇，有人愤怒，也有人辩论这样的问题：中国的应试教育体系培养出来的孩子是否都是没有灵魂的奔命者。

应试教育

通常说法：
examination/exam/test-oriented education system
此处纽约时报用了test-crazed来表达这个含义，-crazed构成复合词表示“因...而发狂的，发疯的”,英文解释为“-crazed combines with nouns to form adjectives that describe people whose behaviour is wild and uncontrolled because of the thing the noun refers to.”比如：
a drug-crazed killer
一个因吸毒而发狂的杀人凶手
后文则出现了另一种表达“test-dominated system”：考试为主导的(教育)制度。
Some called for the parents of the boy to be arrested. Others wondered whether today's children would know true happiness, given the intense pressure to perform well and land good jobs.
有些人要求把男孩的父母抓起来。也有些人想知道，在需要表现出色、找到好工作的巨大压力下，如今的孩子是否知道真正的幸福。

land

land作动词除了表示“着陆，降落”、“掉落，跌落”；此处表示“谋得〔难得的工作、合约等〕”，英文解释为“to succeed in getting a job, contract etc that was difficult to get”，举个：
He landed a job with a law firm.
他在律师事务所谋得一份工作。

此外，land sb in trouble/hospital/court 可以表示“使某人陷入困境/得病住院/卷入官司”等含义，英文解释为：to cause someone to have serious problems or be in a difficult situation.
Still, some defended the parents, saying they were trying to promote their child's best interests in a flawed system.
尽管如此，一些人还是为孩子的父母进行了辩护，称他们是在一个糟糕的体系里尽力为孩子争取利益。
Yong Zhao, a professor of education at the University of Kansas, said the debate reflected widespread anxiety among Chinese parents about getting their children into top schools. In China's test-dominated system, exam scores determine where students go to college and what careers they can pursue.
堪萨斯大学(University of Kansas)教育学教授赵勇说，这场辩论反映出中国家长在让孩子进顶尖学校方面普遍有焦虑感。在中国的应试教育体系中，考试成绩决定了学生上哪所大学，以及他们能够从事的职业。
“No matter how many good schools there are, people are always shooting for the best,” he said. “Where their children go to school represents an achievement, an accomplishment for parents. But many don't know what a good education is.”
“不管好学校有多少所，人们总是在追求最好的，”他说。“孩子上什么学校代表着一种成就，一种父母的成就。但很多人不知道什么是好的教育。”
It is unclear who prepared the résumé, which was addressed to the Shanghai Starriver Bilingual School. As in urban school districts in the United States and elsewhere, it is common for parents in Chinese cities to hire coaches to help their children gain admission to selective schools.
这份简历是写给上海星河湾双语学校的，目前还不清楚简历是什么人制作的。与住在美国及其他地方城市学区的家长一样，中国城市的家长为了帮助孩子进入重点学校，通常会聘请辅导。
A staff member at Shanghai Starriver declined to comment, except to say that the school did not accept résumés from parents as part of the admissions process. The boy's father also declined to comment, saying he did not want to draw attention to his son.
星河湾学校的一名工作人员拒绝发表评论，只是说学校的录取程序不接受家长发的简历。男孩的父亲也拒绝评论，说他不想让人们过多地关注自己的儿子。
The competition for seats at top schools in China is notoriouslycut-throat. In some cities, the wealthy and well connected pay large sums of money, sometimes described as “donations,” to secure placements in top programs.
在中国，争取被顶尖学校录取的竞争出了名的残酷。在一些城市，为确保孩子能上重点学校，富人和有关系的人会支付有时被称为“赞助费”的大笔资金。

cut-throat

表示“竞争激烈的；残酷竞争的”，英文解释为“a cut-throat activity or business involves people competing with each other in an unpleasant way”，举个：
Cut-throat competition is keeping prices low.
激烈的竞争使价格保持在低水平。

notoriously

形容词性notorious，表示“臭名昭著的，声名狼藉的，众所周知的”，英文解释为“famous or well-known for something bad”。

Xiong Bingqi, deputy head of the 21st Century Education Research Institute in Beijing, said China needed to distribute education resources more evenly and to begin evaluating students on more than just test scores.
北京21世纪教育研究院副院长熊丙奇说，中国需要更平等地分配教育资源，也需要改变仅用考试成绩评估学生的做法。
“There is a competition to rank every student,” he said. “Under these circumstances, of course parents want their kids to rank in the top. Then it worsens this kind of anxious competition.”
“竞技化就是把所有学生排队，”他说。“在排队情况之下，当然家长肯定希望孩子排在最前面了，那就加剧了，就出现这种焦虑竞争。”
The boy's résumé reads like a PowerPoint presentation, complete with growth charts and stick-figure clip art. It includes discussion of his adversity quotient and his artistic talents. It also provides details of his schedule — time for memory training, English diary class, sports and piano — and samples of his artwork, including drawings of dogs and fish.
男孩的简历读起来就像是一份PowerPoint演示文稿，上面有增长曲线图表和简笔人物画贴图，以及对他的逆境商数和艺术才华的讨论。简历还给出了他详细的时间表——记忆训练的时间，上英文日记课、体育课和钢琴课的时间——以及他的艺术创作样品，包括他画的狗和鱼。

adversity quotient

AQ，表示“逆境商数”，指当一个人面对逆境时的挫折承受能力与反逆境的能力。小男孩的“简历”里提到：“我是个逆商高的男子汉，如果受到批评，能快速调整情绪并积极投入学习。”
“I never cry when I get shots,” the résumé says. “Starting when I was a year and a half old, I would get up by myself when I fell down. Everyone praised me as brave.”
“我从小打针就不哭，”他在简历中说。“从一岁半开始，摔倒了就自己爬起来，大家都夸我勇敢。”
The résumé closes with a list of English books the boy has read, including “The Hungry Squirrel” and “Bubbles in the Sky.” It shows a picture of him with his head resting on his hand, a pensive look on his face.
简历的结尾处列出了男孩读过的英文书，包括《饥饿的松鼠》(The Hungry Squirrel)和《天空中的泡泡》(Bubbles in the Sky)。在简历上一张照片里，他手托着头，脸上露出沉思的样子。

pensive

表示“沉思的；郁郁不乐的”，英文解释为“thinking a lot about something, especially because you are worried or sad”，举个：
He looked suddenly sombre, pensive.
他突然看起来很阴郁，一副忧虑的样子。

A caption alongside a photograph of the school's terra-cotta facade reads, “When will Shanghai Starriver open its gates to me?”
简历上还有一张星河湾赤褐色校门的照片，旁边配了一个问题：“什么时候星河湾的校门才会对我打开呢？”
- END -
LearnAndRecord
2015年2月8日
2018年11月4日
第1366天
每天持续行动学外语